Let's discuss the quantitative approach of management science,
or quantitative approach to management analysis, quantitative approach to the management system.
What is the main idea in this approach?
We have discussed Taylor's approach, Foyle's approach, the approach of the relationship between people,
and we have been discussing this for at least an hour and a half.
But the main idea is that we speak.
We give different words, we give different examples, we give the opinions of certain authors,
we address our own experience, but these are all words.
Yes, we are constantly focused on economic results, yes, we are constantly focused on business processes,
yes, we are constantly focused on the goals that are in front of us,
but we still do it word for word, without any numbers.
Well, in modern terms, this is so-called humanitarian knowledge or social knowledge.
This is what is necessary.
And, of course, when we study management, we need to be able to provide material,
to be able to present ourselves, to present our idea, to present the company.
That is, the ability to present material, the ability to communicate, the ability to build a relationship is very important.
And, of course, in no case does anyone deny this.
But as for the middle of the 20th century, this time was associated with the development
and widespread implementation of the results of natural sciences.
At this time, computer technology from the 1940s and the 20th century appeared,
software appeared, automatic tracking devices appeared.
As for the middle of the 20th century, this is post-war period.
And the war period led to the introduction and development of various dispatch systems,
radar systems, notification systems, warning systems, information transmission systems, information processing systems,
information control systems.
The middle of the 20th century is the time of the development of information theory.
This is the time of formalization of both natural sciences and humanitarian knowledge.
Naturally, if we are talking about management, many supporters of the management concept theorists
have said that it would be good to switch from all the existing words to their mathematical expression.
Because someone says it well, someone has said something so wonderful that we sit and open our mouths,
and then we think, what did we talk about for two hours?
On the other hand, if we take the principle of the same foil, we have listed more than a dozen,
but again, we remembered something, we did not remember something.
The problem is one.
What are the criteria that will prove to us that this principle is really successful,
this is not successful, on what basis can we evaluate, compare and find out which of them is more important,
which of them is more significant, which of them is dominant, on which it should be based.
The problem of measurement arises.
In business, this is also a very important problem.
I have invested a certain amount of money, how much will I get in the end, what is the delta, what is the profit,
what are the taxes, what are the prospects.
Business likes to count, and this is natural, in the end, the whole business is tied to getting the result.
You all know this very well.
So, the quantitative school of management science, or quantitative approach,
it just set the task that there is a lot of management concepts that justified themselves.
A very important aspect, it was justified.
We talked about the basic concepts.
Of course, at the same time, there were different approaches, which we can't even find in textbooks now,
because they were all-time, they did not have any impact on management, so they were forgotten.
But there are these concepts, their introduction led to any results.
But why is the introduction of, for example, the concept of Foyol, the concept of Taylor,
the concept of the Dankrin of human relations, in some organizations, in some enterprises, in one production,
gives wonderful results, in another production, gives even better results,
in the third production, the results do not change at all.
We introduce the same thing.
So, the problem depends on the fact that, perhaps, these or other approaches are introduced by different people,
who have different levels of competence in the introduction.
Naturally, we are interested in attracting those people,
who we will pay, but who will introduce those or other management approaches, so that we get the desired result.
How to measure these people, how to measure specialists?
How, first, to select the concepts that we want to introduce,
which will be useful for our production, for our tasks, for our market sector?
How, after the chosen concept, to select those consultants, who successfully introduce them?
And how to evaluate the results of the introduction?
The return of investment, the same, in education, in development, in assessment, in motivation,
in the final results that we get.
To do this, we need to create certain quantitative mathematical models.
This is the main task of the quantitative approach.
In fact, it does not offer fundamentally new ideas.
It's the same Taylor, it's the same Fayol, it's the same Rieslinger-Mayoz, the Declaration of Human Relations,
but the quantitative approach tries to form and build a model of each of these approaches.
A mathematical model, a symbolic model, a model that gives the possibility of measurement,
gives the possibility of empirical justification, and what else is very important, a model that is operational.
Introduction of a concept is correct, but it is very general.
What should I introduce?
What processes, what operations, what steps, stages of action should I take?
What steps can I skip?
What steps should I focus more attention on?
The model is good because it gives a visible list of steps, a visible list of actions,
and I can follow the steps, what I do, how I do it, and not move on to the next step
if I see that my previous step has not yet been done.
It's unacceptable to skip.
It's very important, obviously, in education.
If, for example, a person has no idea about debit and credit,
it's pointless to start a discussion with him about different accounting and economic approaches and ideas.
He needs to be taught about himself.
The same thing with management.
Before introducing some final points, like team formation,
a scalar chain of management, system approaches, and result-oriented approaches,
it's important to understand if a person knows what these terms mean.
That's why a key approach is a task to formalize the approaches already recommended by the management,
to build a mathematical model.
Of course, the closer we get to the end of the 20th century,
the more we see that the number of approaches that emerged in the middle of the 20th century
continues to this day.
Today, new ideas and approaches emerge.
At the end, we'll talk about the tendency of learning organizations.
This is one of the ways to develop a number of approaches.
Another model.
There are quite a lot of management models today.
Each model claims to solve certain tasks.
And it does it better than other models.
These models need to be translated into mathematical language,
and then presented with logical schemes.
Either yes or no.
In the sense that there are certain branches of solutions,
and if you follow the corresponding transition, you'll get the next step.
If you don't make a transition from one action to another, it's pointless to develop further.
So, we're talking about building a tree of solutions,
known from mathematics, management, and mechanisms,
where visually and especially with the help of modern computing,
you can imagine the transition stages to achieve the goal.
Complex moments, complex aspects.
We'll talk about the tree of solutions,
and we'll talk about the system approach in management a bit later.
Besides the tree of solutions,
you can use various modeling methods in the conditions of uncertainty.
There are a lot of statistical methods in mathematics.
Stochastic methods.
Discrete analysis.
Variational analysis.
Factorial analysis.
Cluster analysis.
All of these are complex mathematical methods.
It's something that takes years to understand,
but you don't need to go deep into the process of modeling to apply it.
We need results.
We can hire consultants to do all of this,
and then we'll get some recommendations
based on the models we can use.
These recommendations can be clear,
they can be paradoxical, they can be unexpected.
But to get them, there are professional specialists who do this.
We'll pay them for this,
in order to get normal recommendations and implement them.
Modern management is a very complex system,
professionally, as we've talked about,
and it requires hiring different specialists.
Just like Fayol talked about the need to divide the work,
it's pointless to look for a specialist
who can deal with all mathematical methods.
There are good theorists, good practitioners,
great implementers of these or other solutions.
We need to implement the recommendations we are given.
As for the models,
there is a common model of goal management.
When certain tasks are set,
certain goals are set,
and then I track not the process that leads to their solution,
but the final results I get,
and the boundaries that can be cut off,
different wrong approaches, different wrong results.
Budgeting is a problem that is very important
in terms of financing the management system,
and which allows me to set priorities,
to organize motivation,
to build relationships between people, suppliers,
different departments of one organization.
Again, there are different mathematical methods
that exist today,
as well as management methods,
for example, quality circles,
which we'll talk about in the conclusion,
we'll consider the fashionable theory of quality management, etc.
But when we talk about quantitative management,
we shouldn't forget that the model is just one of the forms of reality.
The model can be very beautiful,
but the results it gives us may seem very small.
Therefore, the criterion is practice,
the practical business result we get.
I want to draw your attention to the fact
that the task of quantitative management
is not to create new concepts,
but to formalize existing concepts that justify themselves,
to model them,
so that we have an opportunity to measure
and control the implementation process itself,
and to get the desired result.
As for this school,
there are different management strategies
that were implemented in the 20th century
within this quantitative management school.
As for these approaches,
they are described in the materials
you received for our course,
they are described in the literature.
And, accordingly, these are different ways
of implementing quantitative approaches.
Here on the slide you can see these directions.
These are the directions that were widely developed
from the 60s to the 90s,
and which, in one way or another,
try to quantitatively reflect the realities of the business of that time,
as well as the realities that appeared in business,
and which must be taken into account.
These are different concepts and ideas
that we can familiarize ourselves with,
and we can apply them.
But these are specific options that can be known,
but which are not as fundamental as the methodology of the approach
that we are considering.
Therefore, now we move on to the next approach,
which is associated with management,
which has had a significant impact on management.
This is the so-called process approach to management,
associated with Porter.
The approach he proposed has received a lot of attention.
Why?
Again, we talked about this at the beginning.
If we consider a business process or any activity,
it is always characterized by two characteristics.
The process, the method of achieving some results,
and the result, what I eventually achieved.
As for management,
these two processes are presented particularly clearly.
There are wonderful managers and wonderful managers
who are very good at creating something.
A new organization,
a new structure system in the organization,
new departments,
new structures and their introduction into the market.
They like to organize processes.
When something has already been achieved,
these people cannot stop
and cannot support the state of the system
at the level achieved, at the achieved results,
in order for the system to reproduce the desired results.
These people need to constantly change something,
constantly bring in some innovations, etc.
As long as the organization or process is being created,
these people are very successful,
they are in their place.
But when the result is achieved,
already a good result,
already a desired result,
the result is brought to the market,
then if we start to bring in some new additions,
then the situation is getting worse.
From the point of view of the economy,
because the product is in demand,
and then it is brought in by some changes,
and it is not a fact that the changes
will be used by the same consumer demand as before.
After all, consumers are people,
they also get used to something.
And if we see constant changes,
it does not always suit us.
For example, we can take the Microsoft Office program,
which is constantly changing.
We get used to some Office,
and we use it.
Then another Office appears.
Of course, it retains all the previous features
and adds new ones,
but changes are taking place,
including the usual functions.
The hotkeys are changing,
the way to call functions is changing,
the usual system of actions is changing.
And what does it lead to?
We know that every new Office,
for example, the 2007 Office,
has a huge number of new advantages
that may be interesting to us.
But nevertheless,
we are already used to the previous Office,
and we are already working on automatism.
And, accordingly, for a very long time
we will work on the old Office
and prevent our employees
from switching to other programs.
The same problem is with reading files
in older versions, which often arise.
This is a process situation,
a process of constant change.
And there are other people
who find it very difficult to create something,
very difficult to change something,
very difficult to be present and lead.
We are talking about management,
about the process of change,
about the process of innovation.
But if there is already a well-established system
where the control function is necessary,
in the sense that we talked about,
the control of the constant feedback
with the results we get,
the planning function,
there are already some plans,
the organization of these plans in different ways,
the organization of the already existing result,
and the function of the implementation
of the already developed, justified motivation schemes,
then these people are in their place.
But if there are some changes,
then, accordingly, they cannot be rebuilt.
There are what are called process people
and there are result people.
And depending on those tasks,
depending on those circumstances
that arise, both good and bad,
As for the theories that we have considered,
starting from Taylor, Fayol,
the control of thought
or the doctrine of human relations,
in fact, these are resultive theories.
The main thing here is the achieved result.
Even quantitative theory is also a resultive theory.
We are building a model of achieving
certain results.
Porter pays attention to the process itself.
And this is very much in demand.
Why?
Because modern business,
as we have repeatedly said,
as you know it perfectly,
is a constantly changing thing.
Norms are changing, rules are changing,
normative acts, documents, and so on, are changing.
And you can't get the same result all the time.
In the end, the form of tax accountability changes,
and, accordingly, it is necessary to constantly
redo something.
That's why the social and economic demands
that business has,
that management has,
are so complex that the modern conditions
require a process approach.
That's why the idea of process management
proposed by Porter
has very well met the needs of the time.
It was proposed in the second half of the 20th century,
and since then it has been a success,
and modern management is often a process management.
At the same time, this process approach
is based on relatively simple ideas.
Any approach is good in its simplicity.
We can use some very sophisticated,
very sophisticated theoretical approach to management.
It may look very beautiful on paper,
but how to implement it?
It is very easy to implement,
and it is clear how to achieve it.
As for Porter,
it has three main processes in any business.
The first one is the main processes.
That is, the whole set of processes,
the whole set of activities,
the whole set of operational steps
that are aimed at achieving the result
that my company is engaged in.
If it is production,
then it is the production process of cars,
medicines, computers,
what the company does.
If it is services,
then it is the process of providing services.
That is, when the methods of achieving the results
that I sell are prescribed,
the main processes of the business
that bring me profit,
the main processes in which I invest money
in order to get a return
But, of course,
the main processes do not exist in a vacuum.
I constantly draw attention to the fact
that the whole business exists among other people,
that the whole business exists in society,
in the state, in its social and political institutions.
So, all these main processes
are associated with the methods of action
that support these processes.
Or this is what Porter calls auxiliary processes.
If we produce something,
we need some details.
These details are produced in another company,
in another place.
And, accordingly,
I need to organize contractual relations with this company.
I need to organize delivery,
I need to organize storage,
I need to organize the export from the warehouse
at the right time,
the right amount of details.
I need to organize it so that these details
are as much as necessary,
so that the warehouses are not overfilled,
so that there is no loss for my company.
This is the whole combination of logistics,
the combination of additional sources of financing,
the combination of additional activities.
These are all auxiliary processes.
This is what improves, optimizes,
adds, develops the main processes,
speeds them up,
increases their effectiveness,
increases their output.
Naturally, without auxiliary processes,
the main processes are impossible.
But without the main processes,
the auxiliary processes are pointless.
If I don't use the telecommunications workpiece,
then why do I need the warehouses
if they are not necessarily needed?
It is very important that the main auxiliary processes
are not mutually dependent,
because they are based on each other,
they support each other,
and the violation of communication between them
leads to the fact that we will not get what we want.
The third type of processes
that Porter highlights
are the management processes.
Porter comes from the fact that
the whole business is about interacting with people.
Therefore, management is needed,
which will organize the main process itself,
the main processes that are produced.
Management is needed,
which will organize the implementation,
interaction, functional auxiliary processes
that are necessary for the main processes,
and, accordingly, it is necessary to organize
the management communication here.
In the end, management processes are needed
to modernize both the main processes
and the auxiliary ones,
to introduce innovations,
to introduce new innovations,
to make new proposals and promote them on the market.
This is the whole complexity of management processes,
which we have already discussed.
In principle, Porter did not say anything new.
This was the case with Taylor and Fayol,
and even more so in the doctrine of human relations.
This can be traced in every strategy
of the management of the 20th century,
but the main achievement of Porter
is that he focused his attention
on the need to take into account the processes.
Usually, business people
are focused on the result,
but this is a general approach.
As for the result,
it is realized through processes,
and these processes are constantly changing.
And it is in these processes
that the feedback from the social-economic environment,
from the social-technical environment,
from political values,
moral values, aesthetic values, etc.,
are formed by the psychology of consumer needs.
Porter, proposing his process theory,
focuses on the fact that
management or management system
leads to the result,
but this is a strategy.
This is how the business process ends.
And we need constant tactical processes,
what is happening today, now.
And this is where the process management is important.
We need to manage the current processes,
we need to coordinate the current processes,
we need to modify the current processes,
the connections between them,
the dependencies between them,
the order of everything that exists.
Porter's concept is based on
the fact that it has been widely developed,
and further approaches to management
are based on recognition
not only of the result,
which is what the predecessors had,
but also of the processes.
In fact, Porter has leveled this connection,
and the processes have the same meaning,
the same meaning,
the same attention,
the same relevance as the results
that the traditional business was based on.
And based on this process-result relationship
emerged about 10-15 years later,
after Porter's process concept,
which began to be implemented very quickly
and received general recognition,
a situational approach emerged in management,
which, on the one hand,
pays attention to the processes
that are implemented in business
depending on the situation,
and, on the other hand,
considers the whole set of processes
related to the result.
As for the situational approach in business,
it is the approach that is currently
being implemented in the management system,
both in production and in the service sector,
and which is currently
a working system,
a logical conclusion
of all those concepts
that we have discussed.
And this is the approach
of all those concepts
that we have discussed before,
those concepts that are presented
on the slide that we are looking at today
from the point of view of the evolution
of management thinking in the 20th century.
What is the situational approach to management?
The situational approach to management
is based on a simple basic idea.
There is no business at all,
there is no business result at all,
there is no business process at all.
Any business, any business activity
is implemented by living people
in specific conditions,
in specific circumstances,
in specific means,
in specific possibilities,
and it is not a business.
In this regard, we can evaluate management,
we can consider management,
we can modify management as a management system
only in application to those specific situations
in which it is implemented,
to those specific actions that take place in it.
Accordingly, what steps
should a manager take
based on the situational approach?
The first step is that
a manager should be a professional.
Remember, when we just started
talking about management,
we emphasized that it is a professional activity.
The situational approach,
as a generalization of the entire
historical experience of management,
is a very broad concept.
The situational approach,
since it includes both quantitative
and personalization approaches,
suggests that professionalism means
that a manager should know
the means of professional management.
In fact, he should have the theory,
the experience in management that he has developed.
He should know the system analysis,
the planning methods,
the control methods,
the quantitative methods of decision-making.
That is, professional management today
is not a humanitarian who can speak well,
but a specialist who has not only
humanitarian methods of presenting information,
presentations, communication, communication,
but also the method of psychological analysis.
But this is a specialist who can provide
a mathematical quantitative justification
of the proposed solutions, plans,
and projects.
A professional manager is a specialist
of a wide profile, both humanitarian
and, of course, mathematical.
So, the first is professionalism.
A manager should be able to predict
the possible consequences of each of his actions,
of those or other methods,
of those or other approaches.
Moreover, he should predict
not only positive results,
as they say,
we all like to do this,
but also possible negative consequences.
Yes, we are now increasing our share in the market,
but will the anti-monopoly service
pay attention to us after that?
Will we become monopolists?
From the point of view of business,
this is wonderful,
but from the point of view of social control,
social contact,
there are other difficulties.
The second step of the social approach
requires a manager
to be able to plan,
organize,
and control the results
he has received.
And, again, we work with people,
so we must introduce different motivational schemes.
We need to predict
whether this new motivational scheme
will lead to difficulties
in achieving the final result,
whether it will cause a conflict within the organization,
whether it will give negative results
instead of positive ones.
Yes, it is difficult to predict,
but this is what professionalism is all about.
This is what a professional is all about,
and this is what a manager of experience
is all about.
The next step,
which is presented to the manager
in the social approach,
is that we need to interpret the situation correctly.
I must be able to analyze
the business processes that exist,
the market analysis,
the brand analysis,
the development prospects,
so that I can build the right planning
and organization based on this analysis.
Based on this analysis,
I can build the controlling events
and the motivational schemes
that I will implement.
And finally,
the next step in the management
is to be able to implement specific techniques
that I use for the specific business.
Any novelty is always a risk.
I can already have an approach
that has already justified itself,
which brings a very good result so far.
How much should it be changed?
Now or later,
when this approach
will be taken over by other companies
and something will need to be changed
in order to gain a place in the market.
At the same time,
all the changes in the management
will still lead to some deviations,
very rarely you can change
the management of a company.
Very rarely it can happen
that we have only positive effects.
Someone will quit,
someone will agree,
someone will prevent the introduction of something new.
A person is used to base on what he is already used to.
And a person always opposes,
opposes the new.
How many new actions,
how many new skills will be successful for me?
Here I am a doc,
and I don't know what will happen next.
These are the four main principles
that are implemented in the situational approach.
As for the situational approach,
it immerses in business,
analyzes business,
considers business
from the point of view of the broad means
in which it is imposed,
both the external environment of the organization
and the internal environment of the organization.
Let's look at this slide.
Any organization is placed
in some external social conditions.
This is a state,
this is a city,
these are the authorities,
these are the legislative, executive,
legal norms, etc.
But the main thing is that any organization
is a part of a larger system.
Based on the situational approach,
we can say that the functionality of the system
depends on the adequate functioning
of the elements included in it.
When we talk about an organization
as a system,
we should always mean the necessary resources.
Resources that we get from outside.
The raw materials from which we make
the products of the company.
The staff, the people who work in this company,
who bring their identity to this company,
their identity, their specifics.
These are directly connected
to the final result we will get.
The capital we invest in the company.
The technologies we use in the company.
Technology is a very important element
of any organization.
Industrial intelligence, industrial espionage
are aimed at learning about the changes in technology.
To learn about the information ideas,
the information that the company possesses.
In terms of resources,
any organization includes
a certain process of transformation.
The work itself.
Never will a particular work
become a final detail
if it is not equipped
with the professional skills of the people
who work in it.
Management activity.
We are talking about the fact that in order to get
the desired results,
the right organization is needed.
The right management relationship is built.
There is a certain technological chain.
A certain technological process
is tied to the final result of the production.
There are specific goals
that are realized at each specific part of the production.
In order to get the final goal,
in order to get an Audi car,
it is necessary to have its internal details
and internal parts made,
correctly composed,
connected and fitted to each other.
Naturally, as we have been pointing out,
the output of any organization
is some goods and services
for which this organization is formed.
These funds are invested
in order to get a profit,
to get the investment results
that I make.
And the organization
of the team building
is based on the human factor.
It depends on the organization
of the human relationship,
the motivation of the staff,
the implementation of various
motivational schemes,
the system of team building,
the organization of the team,
the team building team.
This is where the need for a certain output comes in.
And when we get the output,
we have a very important condition
that is the need to maintain feedback.
Feedback that allows us
to see whether we are on the right track
and what else needs to be added
in order to improve
the outcome we get.
Naturally, at every stage
of the functioning of this system
that is immersed in the external environment,
different situational conditions are determined.
And in order to maintain feedback,
we need to take into account
the features of the organization.
The external environment factors include
environmental factors, macroeconomic factors,
legislative, social, demographic.
These are all the conditions
that are really related to the functioning of our organization.
Natural and climatic factors are also included.
Depending on whether it is sunny or rainy outside,
my motivation also depends on this.
If it's raining outside,
I don't want to go out of the warm room.
If it's sunny outside,
I want to go to a resort.
I don't think about work.
I don't want to work now.
On the other hand,
in addition to the external factors,
we need to take into account
the players that are present in this environment.
These are the suppliers of resources,
their relations,
whether the contracts are paid,
how quickly they can provide me with the resources I need.
If I suddenly need to change something,
how satisfied are they with the needs?
The same applies to the suppliers of services.
Services and material production
are two interconnected things.
If I need some details,
I need to agree with the logistics company
about their delivery, storage, etc.
These are the services that are closely connected
to the production of goods.
It's no coincidence that we talk about
business in production and business in service delivery.
Naturally, we are directly connected
with the partners we interact with,
with the controlling agencies
that check whether we have filled in the tax documents,
how we have dispatched the goods, etc.
We are directly connected to the consumers.
In the end, the consumers are the people
who pay us for the products we have produced.
If our result is the best,
but it is not in the best condition,
then we are not in the best condition.
We are in the worst condition.
If my result is the best,
but it is not in the best condition,
then it will be a loss for me.
It will not bring me profit,
but it will bring me problems.
Therefore, we need to be able
to fight for the consumers.
At the same time, there are competitors
for the same resources and consumers.
In our age of information,
PR and advertising are of great importance.
They interact with the media.
The media form the preferences of the consumers,
the relations of the consumers,
the prejudices of the consumers,
the priorities of the consumers,
the relations to certain products.
Consequently, they are the ones
who determine the business results
that we want to get
with the well-made production,
with the well-made management system.
The media can both raise the company
in the open and destroy it.
We live in a social world
and we have to be careful
about the media.
All these factors should be taken into account.
It is not for nothing that now
PR departments are being created
in large corporations,
marketing departments,
communication departments,
advertising departments,
and promotion of mass media.
Yes, it is a big investment,
but it is not a big investment
that will pay off in any case
if the company plans to exist
in the market and beyond.
As for these factors of the external environment,
they are presented in a clear way
so that you can see the connections
that exist, the elements that exist.
I would also like to draw your attention
to the fact that these factors
have different meanings
depending on the situation
and the impact on the business.
Some factors directly affect
the results of my business,
the profit that I get
as a result of the investments.
There are also factors of indirect impact.
If the direct impact is direct
and I should focus on it,
then the indirect impact is delayed.
It seems that today,
right now, it does not affect
the functioning of my business,
but on the other hand,
not taking into account these factors,
it can lead to me being
in a losing or winning position
after a while.
First of all, these are political factors.
Whatever we produce,
be it toothbrushes, cars, shoes,
it is still based on the political conditions
that exist.
If we have a stable economy
where the policy is directed
to support economic relations
and economic development,
it is a favorable condition for business development.
If we have a totalitarian economy
or a state-controlled economy,
it does not always lead to positive results
because in this situation,
in addition to my own business interests,
which are obvious,
I need to get a profit
and pay off the investments.
There are also political demands
related to the problem of import,
export, redistribution of financial flows,
election problems, etc.
These are not business factors,
but they are factors that
significantly affect even the most successful business.
The same policy implements
a normative legal basis for business.
If the rules of the game change constantly,
like in the 90s,
where we all lived,
it is difficult to live by the law.
There is always an opportunity
to exert pressure
on the business community
because of the changed legal norms.
The same applies to economic factors.
There is a stable economy,
there is a period of social transformations,
there are transition periods
when the requirements are changed,
the state of accountability is changed,
subsidies are changed,
the number of employees is destroyed,
the connections that have been formed
for decades are destroyed,
and the entire production system
and management system have to be re-established.
Not everyone is ready for this.
Let's remember the 90s in Russia,
the fruits of which we will reap today.
But again, we can talk about
socio-cultural factors,
the mass media has launched a campaign
about genetically modified products.
A huge number of people
do not understand what it is.
But this abbreviation GMO,
genetically modified objects,
is known to all old people,
they cannot understand what it is,
how dangerous it is.
This is a socio-cultural factor.
Natural factors.
Let's remember the disasters
that are happening now with the weather.
A very hot summer,
cold winters.
No wonder that today,
because the summer was harsh,
the price of grain is changing,
and the price of other products
is increasing with all the consequences
that come from it.
Both social and economic.
And of course,
when we talk about indirect impact,
we should not forget about scientific and technical progress.
As for Western business,
Western management,
they invest in scientific research
to outrun their competitors.
Because today, as we have already said,
the profit and share of the market
is obtained by the one who managed
to bring to this market what will be in demand.
In Russia,
for the last 15 years,
little attention was paid to scientific research,
and we have hopelessly lagged behind the West.
Nevertheless,
today there are attempts
to change the picture,
in particular,
we are talking about nanotechnology.
This is what will be used by the state,
and this is what can be used
as an indirect factor in the development of business
in the perspective of possible investments.
This is the situation
that is associated with the external impact
on a particular business company.
But,
we are talking about the fact
that the company,
in addition to external impact,
also has internal functions.
This is what we have touched upon,
starting with Fayol,
and especially in the school of human relations.
This is the company's mission,
what does the company expect?
To get a quick profit,
and then we'll see,
or does it expect to exist for a long time,
and then we'll see.
To form its own history,
its own brands,
its own relations,
its own clients,
its own approaches,
its own structure,
how the staff is selected,
how the staff is trained,
how the staff is evaluated,
how the staff trajectory is formed,
what culture exists in the company,
what corporate culture,
what corporate ethics,
what form of clothing,
what form of relations,
what form of interaction and promotion
along the bureaucratic ladder
that exists in any company,
what strategy exists in the company,
does the company have a long-term strategy,
so that the staff knows
that the company is supposed to exist for a long time,
like Japanese companies,
and, accordingly,
you can make your own development from this company.
Either this company is 7-minute,
or this company is for a certain period of time,
what structure does the company have?
Subordination structure, department structure,
department structure,
management structure that exists in it,
what management styles exist,
are they authoritarian, democratic,
or liberal,
in what industry does the company develop,
and in what area does it function,
what kind of knowledge,
what kind of professionalism is needed in the company,
what is the stage of the organization's development,
is it a newly created company,
is it a company that has already recommended itself,
is this company at the stage of development,
or at the stage of decline,
what is the stage of the life cycle in this company,
because all these are important factors of the internal environment
that have a significant impact on the organization's development.
All these factors reflect the situation.
These factors can be listed for a long time,
and in the literature that is offered to you,
other factors are described there.
The main thing is that, of course,
we have talked a lot about external factors,
but internal factors play a significant and fundamental role
in the organization's development,
in the organization's management structure,
because there is no abstract organization.
An organization is specific people,
specific managers, specific owners,
specific style and management system
that exist in this organization,
and with the most favorable external situation,
if there is no qualified staff in the organization,
if there is no qualified management system in the organization,
we cannot achieve results in the most favorable situation,
simply because not everything is fine
within the organization itself.
From this point of view,
in the literature there are many different approaches
that allow to get the most of the results.
The most of the results
from the point of view of how the parameters of the organization,
the relationship within the organization,
the external situation,
the external economic conditions of the organization
correspond to the situational requirements that are presented.
As for these approaches,
we will consider two of them,
but you can look at other approaches
in the literature that is offered to you.
Because there are many approaches,
there are many models,
and their application depends on the specific conditions,
on the specificity of the organization,
and it is very difficult to offer some general schemes
that will be applicable in each case.
In particular,
Harold Leavitt was offered
four alternative approaches
that can be used to assess
the efficiency of the organization
and the degree of its prospective.
The picture you see on the slide
was named the Leavitt Diamond
simply because the presence of solid,
rigid relationships
provides for rigid archaeological models.
If some of their elements
are weak or some connection is insufficient,
the organization collapses and collapses like a house of cards.
Diamond is a substance
that has the strongest structure,
and this strength is provided
by the connections that exist between the atoms.
The same thing exists between the variables
that are highlighted by the diamond.
The first variable is the mission of the company.
What is the task of the company?
Is it long-term or short-term?
What is the scope of the market sector?
What does it want to achieve?
After the organization's mission is determined,
what structure exists within the organization
to achieve the goals set by the company?
What is the structure of the organization?
What are the technologies that the company owns?
What are the competitive advantages
that these technologies provide?
Are they outdated or innovative?
Do these technologies provide the opportunity
for the company to get the desired result
that will be in demand?
And of course,
what is the structure of the organization?
What is the structure of the organization?
And of course,
the basis of everything is the personnel.
Those people who work in the organization,
those people who realize and perform its missions,
those people who function in the created structure,
those people who realize any technologies.
Each of these four elements is essential
in terms of organizing internal business processes
that lead to a specific result,
a specific service that we introduce to the market.
Almas Leavitt is a model
that is described in such variables
that we can track,
operationalize within each company
and calculate how much of this
information is available
and how well these variables are interconnected
and how much they provide us
with the competitive advantages
in terms of achieving
the business result that interests us.
If Leavitt deals with the structure of the organization
and its description through variables,
then it is necessary to understand
that McKinsey, another researcher,
proposed a ladder model
as a result of the analysis of business processes
and all those situational processes.
It was called the McKinsey ladder
that shows that at any time
each company has some alternative development.
It is very important
that the business model
and the requirements of the consumer
constantly change.
The business is successful
if it is able to catch these changes
and offer services, goods,
services, goods in time
and not to be afraid
of the consequences of these changes.
The business is successful
if it can offer services, goods
that are in demand now.
The task of the managers
is to identify these alternatives
because the problem is the alternative
that management faces.
The performer works on a specific production,
performs specific actions in specific conditions
and he can be initiative in his place,
but the manager has a common picture
and a common situation.
The manager determines specific strategies
and development prospects
depending on which the performer's activity changes.
As for McKinsey,
it is based on the fact that there is a business in the present time.
As we can see in the lower left corner of the slide.
There is a business in the present time.
We can start from the existing competitive environment
and set a specific tactical task
to be successful in this moment,
in this condition.
But if we think about alternatives,
if we think about the future,
if we think about the goals set again,
we should consider the possibilities
of moving to a new competitive environment,
the possibilities of changing the market
and analyzing the prospects
that are emerging in the market
in order to satisfy these prospects.
The business exists in a specific geographical location
and here we should think about
what we can talk about
in terms of expanding the business.
The opening of new production
in new places, new countries,
in new cities.
How to find out
in those geographical conditions
depending on those climate features
what products are in demand.
For example, what shoes to produce
in the North or on the Black Sea coast of the Caucasus,
which of them will be in demand
and what new products can be offered.
Besides the geographical structure,
we should pay attention to the business structure.
There are some business interactions,
business connections.
On the other hand,
we should think about merging
or merging with other companies,
including them, buying those companies
in order to expand the market
and take a bigger position
in the market environment,
in the production environment that exists.
Again, we can analyze the existing value system
that exists in the company
in terms of the relationship
to the product production
and we can think about forming
a new value system
in order to satisfy the consumer's need
to buy not just Indian tea,
which was 20 years ago,
but all modern teas that exist,
like Karkade, Lipton,
tea in teapots, etc.
Depending on the advertising
that exists, aggressive advertising,
big media,
consumers' needs are formed,
as we have already discussed,
and a lot of money can be invested
to satisfy the consumer's needs
and to make him buy those products
and use those services
that he doesn't have a significant need for,
but it is specially designed.
We can consider an alternative
to increase sales,
attract new consumers,
and expand the market.
McKinsey's ladder shows
that business is constantly changing
and this model allows us
to analyze the changes that will come
and to be together with the market
not when they will be expanded
and everyone will stop to satisfy them,
but in advance.
The ability to anticipate
the requests that arise
and to imagine
the quality of a successful business
that will lead you to the business elite
or to the business of the future
will be the most important thing
that will help us to understand
the change in the market
and the change in the business.
We have discussed two models
that relate to the situation
in business.
There are many other models,
but my goal is to explain
how to perceive the tasks
and how to analyze and evaluate them.
These are the circumstances
that relate to the situation approach.
At this stage we have discussed
the key evolutionary ideas
of management thinking
that were formed
during the 19th century
and that have an impact
on the management of today.
At the end of our meeting
I would like to talk about the prospects.
Yes, it is good.
We have discussed the economic approach,
the classical approach,
the quantitative approach,
the systematic approach,
and the theory of strategies.
We see that changes are constantly taking place
and we need to react to the external environment
in order to get the desired results.
What are the trends
in the management world?
Where can we be
in the current business environment
or work ahead of the times?
It is very difficult to make forecasts
and to give an analysis
that relates to the existing business environment.
It is because it is the area
that has not yet developed.
These forecasts can be realized
or not.
But there are trends
that are actively developing today
and that are being addressed
by more and more organizations.
And significant funds are being invested
in order to make possible innovations
and investments.
Today I invest funds
so that they bring me profit soon.
One of the significant trends
in the development of management
today is the so-called
electronic or virtual business.
The wide introduction
of information technologies,
the introduction of computer technology,
the development of the Internet,
the development of electronic communications,
the development of telecommunications
led to the fact that in order to get the necessary information
and to organize any interaction,
it is no longer necessary
to constantly maintain direct contact with someone,
to call on the phone, and so on.
Today there are a lot of tasks,
a lot of business processes and functions
that can be carried out electronically.
Payments, service provision,
search for information,
building of interaction.
Today all this is realized
with the help of software
that is not only imaginable,
but also virtual in terms of the use
of modern information and telecommunications technologies.
Today it is no longer necessary
to come to work.
Today it is enough to have a computer
and with the help of a computer
you can organize those or other business processes
that give a concrete, tangible result.
Today there are more and more organizations
that deal with electronic business.
In terms of virtual stores,
in terms of service provision,
there is no need to look for something
in stores and enterprises.
It is enough to go to the computer,
find the services you are interested in
and pay for them.
Again, it is not necessary to pay in cash,
you can pay with electronic payment methods.
And this service is delivered to your home.
A very promising and promising business
that is being implemented today.
This business is not only about design
and development of websites,
but also about sales, training,
remote learning.
This is what we are doing today.
This is also an electronic business.
You have a disk
and you use this disk to interact with me
in order to get the knowledge
that you need
in order to get more results
from the business you are engaged in,
to get more profit
from the investments you make.
The organization of electronic business
is a very broad sphere of activity
that is gaining billions of dollars today.
Bill Gates is the richest man on the planet,
who made this wealth for himself
actually on software.
We all use the results
that Microsoft has achieved.
You can treat them differently,
but this is a fact.
That is why virtual business
or electronic business
is gaining more and more popularity
from the management point of view.
The organization of management system is very interesting.
How to organize the interaction and management
of those employees who sit on computers.
There is a lot of literature
where you can learn a lot
from the sources I have suggested.
This is the most promising
trend of the development of modern management.
Not to mention that the management system
can be implemented
with the help of electronic interaction.
Today, the same manager
can communicate with the help of e-mail,
e-mails, e-mails.
We know that a lot of organizations
are functioning quite successfully.
Moreover, where such a system of e-communication is implemented,
the problem of time management
is solved very positively.
The manager has more time
not to solve specific problems,
but to deal with strategic aspects of his business.
This is a separate and wide area of research.
The next trend of modern management
is connected with the information,
with the knowledge that people possess,
thanks to which we get
the desired results of the competition.
We have already said many times
that today,
thanks to the wide development
of information technologies,
information becomes material,
which acquires value.
Moreover, each company has its own
important knowledge, important information,
important technologies,
which make up the company's specific activity,
which make up the basis of its efficiency
on the market,
thanks to which it has a competitive advantage
over other companies.
In this regard,
the management of knowledge
has become a very serious trend in modern management.
Knowledge management is closely related
to the creation of so-called
training organizations.
The idea of training organizations
was introduced by Peter Senge, Chris Argyris,
and you can read more about it
in the literature that I have suggested.
The main idea is that
if an organization does not try
to pay attention to feedback,
to reflect the changes
that occur in the external environment,
and what concerns the training organizations,
this is also a development of situational approach.
The organization is in the environment,
this is the first time,
and in this environment there is information
about the organization needed for its development.
And the organization has an internal environment
in which people with their knowledge are located,
and this is the only case
when we invest funds in training and development,
and not only for individual employees,
but for all the employees of the organization,
when the organization is able to introduce innovations,
change either technological,
informational, organizational,
controlling, planning chains,
only in this case
the organization will have
undisputed competitive advantage on the market.
It is with such qualities that the training organization has.
You can see a comparison
between a traditional organization
and a training organization on this slide.
This is a summarized slide
that shows the characteristics of the organization
according to the criteria that are usually applied.
We can pay attention to the following.
The main emphasis is made
on the knowledge that the organization has
through the people in this organization,
and secondly, on the ability to apply this knowledge,
to receive this knowledge,
to develop this knowledge,
to make innovations
in order to achieve the goals
that are set by the organization.
The training organization is, in fact,
the idea of the mid-90s,
which today is getting more and more developed,
and to a large extent it is related to the development
of the virtual business itself,
which we talked about today.
But the main thing here is that the emphasis is made on people.
It is emphasized once again that all successes
are based on the knowledge of the staff
that works in this organization,
on the knowledge of the manager
whose system is represented in the organization,
on the reflection of the achievements
that are on the market today,
and on the implementation of the innovations
that will bring us any results tomorrow.
Another trend is the so-called
total quality management.
This trend was born in the 80s,
in the 90s of the last century.
It was born in Japan.
This is the achievement that came to us from Japan,
and gradually this total quality management
is gaining more and more popularity.
No wonder Japanese goods
have become synonymous with quality.
Of course, I mean real Japanese goods,
not the fake ones that are made for them.
Moreover, all those Chinese fake goods
that are made under brand labels
use trust, respect,
and a certain attitude to the confidence
in the quality of Japanese goods
that they have.
So, indeed, this quality management
has revolutionized not only management,
but also consumer psychology.
Because today the consumer
wants not just to get the goods
that suit him,
but to get the goods of the appropriate quality.
Simply because it also affects
your social status,
it indicates your status,
what kind of goods you can use.
You can drive a Jeep,
you can drive a Zhiguli or a Zaporozhets.
These are different cars,
but their qualities are different.
As for the overall quality management,
it is precisely the philosophy of management.
And the main idea of this philosophy
is that if you want to achieve
a certain quality of a product,
you should constantly improve
the quality of the product.
Pay attention, you can't supply
a new product,
you can supply a product
that has been in demand for a long time,
but the product of the appropriate quality
is a Japanese TV and a Rubin TV.
Both are washed,
but for some reason we prefer
Japanese technology, not Russian.
I just want to draw your attention to this.
Moreover, in addition to constant improvement
of quality,
a quick reaction to change
customer needs and expectations is also necessary.
Customers want the plate to be silver,
let's give them a silver plate.
Customers want different pictures
on the car.
Pay attention, today we see
more and more cars with these pictures.
This is quality management
in the sense that we want a car.
After all, the picture has no influence
on its driving qualities,
reliability, crash tests.
But we want this car with a Jaguar
or someone else.
This is a response to the demand
that is presented to you.
The idea of new approaches
to management
in the framework of quality management
is in the concept of general quality management.
First of all,
the main attention is paid to the client.
That is, the client is the one
around whom the market
and production start to rotate.
Not business results,
but the client with his needs.
Because the client pays,
which means that the client will provide business results.
This is a centralized business.
We care about continuous self-improvement.
If we release something
and it is sold,
it does not mean that we can relax a little.
We must improve what is already in demand.
Again, the important thing is
that when we talk about quality management,
we focus on the process.
We get the result.
But the process is important.
How quickly we get this result.
What components we use
to get the result.
From the point of view of ecological purity,
which is now a problem for all consumers.
From the point of view of genetically modified objects,
which we have already talked about.
Return to natural food, etc.
The production process is important.
We can get something quickly,
but due to the fact that more time is needed,
it will be more qualitatively,
which means more in demand.
The tendency to improve quality
is realized by the fact that it is necessary
to improve the quality of everything
that is done by the organization.
Cars should be of the same level.
There should be a particular parking lot.
If you buy equipment,
you should buy the most perfect equipment.
Despite the fact that the opportunities
that equipment can provide may not be in demand.
But still, from the point of view of improving
the quality of everything that is done by the organization,
it is a cost of this process.
When we talk about quality,
it is important to talk about measurements.
Everything should be very well adjusted to each other.
There should be no gaps in the product,
no rounded corners, or something else.
The product should be assembled not on a knee,
but should be a high-tech version.
From the point of view that everything is adjusted,
the quality of the product should be the highest.
This is the most important thing.
It is very important to pass the authority
to the workers.
The worker should feel that he is responsible
for the high quality of each element
that is made by him.
The quality of the product depends on the quality
that is inside.
The quality of the product should be the highest.
This is a real trend.
The workers should discuss
and monitor the quality of each work.
If someone made a mistake,
the overall quality of the product
that is made will decrease.
This is the third approach
that is being implemented today.
As for the management perspective,
we have focused on three main approaches.
Of course, this does not mean
that there are no other directions.
In the literature that is offered to you,
you can familiarize yourself with other trends.
The three that we have discussed today
are the most important ones.
The first one is the management perspective.
The second one is the management perspective.
The third one is the management perspective.
The fourth one is the management perspective.
Let's sum up our meeting.
We have discussed the main categories
and approaches that exist in the modern management.
We have discussed the history of the emergence
of management as a scientific discipline.
We have discussed the main concepts,
approaches and systems that exist in management.
We have discussed their positive and negative sides.
The main thing is that each of these concepts
depends on the specifics of the tasks
that are presented to the company.
It is pointless to look for a perfect concept
that will immediately give us the desired results.
We need to start from the situation,
from the tasks, from the requirements,
from the specifics, from the social, economic,
social and technical conditions that exist.
Depending on the needs that arise,
we can develop a certain management concept.
Finally, we have discussed the areas of development
and the future trends that exist in the modern management.
These trends are being implemented today.
We are participating in them.
They will help us to acquire
competitive advantages
in the harsh conditions of the market.
Thank you for your attention. See you!